design/001_online_editing_basic/001_online_editing_basic.adoc, before:

= Online Platform for with Basic Functionality for Dictionary Editing
Falko 
v1.1, 2022-09-02
:pdf-theme: theme.yml


// create pdf with plantuml figures: https://fiveandahalfstars.ninja/blog/2017/2017-05-01-plantuml-and-pdf

== Changes

[%header,cols=4]
|===
| Version
| Date
| Change
| Author

| 1.1
| 
| Added analysis of current ODS format.
| Falko

|===


== Online Platform for with Basic Functionality for Dictionary Editing

This document describes the steps necessary for switching to an online
editing for the group of dictionary editors working on the DPD and
related dictionaries. The idea is to cover the minimal requirements
necessary to enable an online editing of the data base in a manner that
allows for a synchronized access by multiple editors to the same data,
without introducing any disadvantages for the editors. An outline of its
features is listed in the subsequent section.

=== Outline of the Features

* Multiple editors can access the dictionary data concurrently.
* Each dictionary entry in the data base reflects the superset of the
DPD and DPS ODT columns, so that both existing sets of data can merged
and imported into the application.
* Multiple target languages are supported.
* Editors can assume two different roles:
** Dictionary Editor: Full access to all entries
** Language Editor: Access only to a subset of the target languages that
are modelled in the respective dictionary
* The dictionary generation remains as it is currently: a local process
invoked by the editor with the already existing tools. The only
difference is that the input data now is exported from the web
application’s central DB.

=== Current Local Workflow

The following diagram shows the current purely local workflow for
editing and dictionary generation.

[.thumb]
[plantuml, uml_figures/current_workflow]
----
@startuml
skinparam maxMessageSize 150
skinparam wrapWidth 150
skinparam dpi 300

box Local entities
actor "Editor" as editor
database "ODT Database" as odt
collections "CSV Export" as csv
control "Dictionary\nGenerator" as dict_gen
collections "Generated\nDictionary" as gen_dict
end box

group dictionary editing
editor -> odt: edits the dictionary entries
end group

group dictionary generation
odt -> csv: export as CSV
group Existing Dictionary Generation Process
editor -> dict_gen: invoke
csv <- dict_gen: import and process the CSV to generate the inflections, etc.
dict_gen -> gen_dict: produce the dictionary
end


end group

@enduml
----

=== Online Editing Workflow

The following diagrams show the workflows for the initial one-time data
migration, online editing, CSV export from the web-application and local
dictionary generation:

[.thumb]
[plantuml, uml_figures/migration]
....
@startuml
skinparam maxMessageSize 150
skinparam wrapWidth 150
skinparam dpi 300

box Local entities
actor "Editor" as editor
collections "CSV Export" as csv
control "Merge-Tool" as merge_tool
end box

group one-time data migration
editor -> merge_tool: invoke
csv -> merge_tool: input DPD and DPS CSVs
merge_tool -> csv: output merged CSV data together with report about entries where manual merge is necessary
end 
@enduml
....

[.thumb]
[plantuml, uml_figures/dict_edit]
....
@startuml
skinparam maxMessageSize 150
skinparam wrapWidth 150
skinparam dpi 300

box Local entities
actor "Editor" as editor
collections "CSV Export" as csv
control "Dictionary\nGenerator" as dict_gen
collections "Generated\nDictionary" as gen_dict
end box
box Cloud instance #SkyBlue
control "Web\nApplication" as webapp
database "Database" as web_db 
end box


group dictionary editing
editor -> webapp: edits the dictionary entries
webapp -> web_db: update the database
end group

group dictionary generation
editor -> webapp: choose subset of target languages for export
webapp <- web_db: extract data
webapp -> editor: download CSV file
group Existing Dictionary Generation Process
editor -> dict_gen: invoke
csv <- dict_gen: import and process the CSV to generate the inflections, etc.
dict_gen -> gen_dict: produce the dictionary
end


end group

@enduml
....

==== Further Features of the Online Editing Workflow

* Access control: The following user rights and roles are supported:
** Dictionary Owner:
*** full access to all fields of the dictionary entries
*** invite other users to dictionary and assign right and role
** Dictionary Editor: full
*** full access to all fields of the dictionary entries
** Language Editor:
*** Online write access to meaning translations of a defined subset of
target languages
* Prevention of concurrent access:
** If two users modify the same entry concurrently, a corresponding
message is shown to the second user attempting to submit his updates,
allowing him to save his changes elsewhere manually and update the entry
again. (other more sophisticated locking mechanisms are also conceivable
for the future should that become necessary, e.g. timed locks in the
database which would prevent this situation beforehand)
* Search form for dictionary entries
** As a help for the translators, it is also possible to search for
words where a meaning given in primary target language has been more
recently modified than one of its translations (indicating it might need
an update).

=== Comparison of the Current Workflow and the Described Workflow with Online Editing

==== Advantages of the Online Workflow

* Online collaboration:
** After the one-time merge procedure, the editors work on shared data
which is always synchronized.
** It is easy to invite further collaborators for other target
languages.
** Correctness of the web applications import and export features is
easily verifiable: import and export of CSV must yield the same CSV
again.
* Support for multiple meanings for any headword.
** This reflects the common approach of dictionaries. This is hard to
achieve with a spreadsheet database as for each meaning one column has
to be reserved.

==== Disadvantages of the Online Workflow

* Offline editing is no longer possible. The impact of this should be
considered thoroughly, as some editors may reside in southeast-Asian
countries, where power cut-offs and blackouts happen on a regular
basis.footnote:[In principle, it would also be possible to support
offline editing. But the implementation of that would most likely
require a multiple of the effort that is needed for the basic online
editing functionality that is described in this document. This would be
a fragile process needing a lot of attendance; for instance the case
where the cloud instance has already been updated and the user tries to
import data in an old format.]

=== ODS Data model

Table <<#tab_ods_model>> shows the current ODS model of DPD and DPS.


[#tab_ods_model]
.Mapping of ODS models to the data base model 
[%header,cols="3,3,3,2,3,3"]
|===
| Col. DPD
| Col. DPS
| Source format
| Necessary transformation 
| Database field type and format
| Work items / Open Questions

| "POS" – grammatical word type
| "POS"
| <word-type>
| simple mapping which also handles the sub-types of noun-likes
| choice for word type: {verb, noun-like, indeclinable}, type "noun-like" footnote:[In the database model, each words can be assigned a word-type. Noun-like words, i.e. all words that are declined, are captured by the same word-type and can
be assigned one or sub-types for noun-like words out of the list.] has choice for sub-type: {male, neuter,
feminine, adjective, past participle, present participle, gerundivum (to be extended as necessary)}
a| 

* Missing word types need to be added to the data base model. 
* New fields need to be editable via forms. 
* Simple mapping needs to be implemented for import.
#What does "ptp" stand for?#

| "Grammar" – Word type with additional information
| –
| <word-type> [,<word-type>]* [of (<ref. headword as text>\|<ref. headword construction>)] 
|
| plain text field. footnote:[Each dictionary entry will have a text field for the "Grammar" information. As this field from the DPD ODS model often includes a reference to another headword, it is possible to later replace the textual
information with the appropriate link – automatically when there is no ambiguity and through manual interaction elsewhere.]
| Simple mapping needs to be implemented.

| "Derived from" – word which builds the basis for a derivation of an entry.
| –
| partly words, partly constructions:
 ""\|(<headword>)\|(<prefix><root>)
| simple mapping to text field
| text field
| 

| Neg – indicates whether the word carries a negating prefix 
| – 
| ""\|"neg"
| simple mapping  
| boolean field
a| 

* add new data base field
* implement mapping


| "Verb" – derived verb type: whether caus or pass
| –
| "caus"\|"pass"
|
| choice: {caus, pass}
|

| "Trans" – whether verb is transitive
| –
| ""\|"trans"\|"intrans"
|
| choice: {unknown, true, false}
|

| "Case" – case of object when transitive
| –
| ""\|("+acc"\|"+loc"\|"+instr"\|"+dat"\|"+abl"[ & +...]
|
|
|

| "Meaning IN CONTEXT"
| –
| <meaning>[; meaning2 [; ...]]
|
|
| What does "in context" mean here? Is this the colloquial meaning?

| "Non IA"
|
|
|
|
| What does "Non IA" stand for? What are possible values?

| "Sanskrit"
| –
| word or construction: ""\|(<word(part)>[ + <word-part>])
|
|
|

| "Sk Root"
| –
| ""\|"√ <root>" 
a| 

* build list of all roots from source information
* populate roots table in database
* link word to root in root table
| see section on root table below
|


| "SK" – meaning of the root in Sanskrit
| –
| text
| simple mapping
| text
|

| "Cl" – class of the Sanskrit root (?)
|
|
|
|
| #What is the reference to the set of classes here?#

| "Pāḷi Root"
| –
| ""\|"√ <root>"
| (root table generation), link headword to root
|
|

| "Root In" – internal form of the root
| –
| "0"\|<root with doubled leading consonant>
|
|
|

| "j" 
| –
| "̣
|
|
| #What is "j"?#

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|


|===

=== Database Data Model

==== Roots

Roots are modelled as shown in the following diagram

.Data model for roots
[.thumb]
[plantuml,uml_figures/model_roots]
....
@startuml
skinparam wrapWidth 250
skinparam dpi 200

hide circle 

entity "Root" as root {
<<col>> *id
<<col>> pali_root: Text [e.g. "bhidh"]
<<col>> variant: Integer [e.g. "1"]
--
<<col> in_comps: Text
<<col>> group: Integer
<<col>> sign: Text
<<col>> meaning: Text
<<col>> sk_root: Text
<<col>> sk_root_mn: Text
<<col>> example: Text
<<col>> what: Text
<<col>> same_diff: Bool
<<col>> matrix: Bool
'<<col>> dhatupatha: Integer
'<<col>> dp_root_text: Text
'<<col>> dp_root_variant: Integer
'<<col>> dp_pali: Text 
'<<col>> dp_english: Text
'<<col>> kaccayana_dhatu_manjusa: Integer
'<<col>> dm_root: Text 
'<<col>> dm_pali: Text 
'<<col>> dm_english: Text
'<<col>> saddanitippakaranam_dhatumala
'<<col>> SnPāli
'<<col>> 
...
}
note right of root: Questions: what does bold text in the columns DpPāli and DpEnglish indicate? Doese this need to be preserved? What is the meaning of the column "What?" and is it necessary? What does "matrix" indicate?

note top of root: pali_root together with variant is unique. same_diff indicates whether in_comps is non-empty and differs from pali_root. It must updated on each update of an object.


entity "base" as base {
<<col>> *id
--
<<col>> str_value: Text
<<col>> derivation: Choice {"none", "caus", "pass"} 

}

entity "class" as class {
<<col>> *class: Integer
--
}

entity "root dictionary" as root_dict {
<<col>> *id
<<col>> name: Text (unique) (e.g. "Pāṇinīya Dhātupāṭha")
--
<<col>> source_language: Choice {"pali", "sanskrit"}
<<col>> variant: Integer
<<col>> target_language: Choice {"english"}

}


entity "root dictionary entry" as root_dict_entry {
<<col>> *id
--
<<col>> number: Integer
<<col>> root_dict: Ref. to "root dictionary"
<<col>> root: Text (i.e. in source language)
<<col>> translation: Text (i.e. in target language)
}

note left of root_dict_entry: "number" receives the first column given for example for Dhātupātha and Kaccāyana Dhātu Mañjūsā. "variant" seems to be needed only for Dhātupātha.

note top of root_dict: this object models the historical root dictionaries, e.g. DpPāli, etc.

note bottom of root_dict_entry: this object is one entry in one of the root dictionaries for a given Pāḷi root

root ||..o{ base
root }o..o{ class 
root_dict ||..o{ root_dict_entry
root ||..o{ root_dict_entry

@enduml
....

==== Dictionary Entries

The following diagram shows the data base model for the dictionary data:

* Each dictionary has a number of entries (headwords)
* Each headword object features the superset of all the columns
currently used in DPD and DPS
* Each headword can have any number of meanings in the dictionary’s
primary target language (i.e. here English)
* Each meaning can have translations in any secondary target language
defined for this dictionary

[.thumb]
[plantuml,uml_figures/model_dict_entry]
....
@startuml
skinparam wrapWidth 650
skinparam dpi 300

hide circle 
entity "Dictionary" as dict {
<<col>> *dictionary_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> Dictionary name 
}

entity "Dictionary Entry (Headword)" as entry {
<<col>> *entry_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> <superset of all columns of DPD and DPS except for meanings>
<<col>> variant: Integer 

}
note right of entry: "variant" differentiates between various etymologically\ndifferent homonyms as e.g. PED does with superscript\nnumbers ("dhamma¹" etc). "variant" is automatically assigned\nby the application.

entity "Meaning" as meaning {
<<col>> *meaning_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> meaning_text: Text
}
note right of meaning: meaning is given in the primary target language\nof the dictionary


entity "Meaning_Translation" as meaning_translation {
<<col>> *meaning_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> meaning_text: Text
<<col>> target_language: Integer 
}
note right of meaning_translation: application logic ensures that only one meaning\ntranslation per target_language is possible

 dict ||..o{ entry
 entry ||..o{ meaning
 meaning ||..o{ meaning_translation 
@enduml
....

Commit message:

using better font with less unicode failures

design/001_online_editing_basic/001_online_editing_basic.adoc, after:

= Online Platform for with Basic Functionality for Dictionary Editing
Falko 
v1.1, 2022-09-16
//:pdf-theme: theme.yml
:pdf-theme: default-with-fallback-font
:title-page:

// create pdf with plantuml figures: https://fiveandahalfstars.ninja/blog/2017/2017-05-01-plantuml-and-pdf

== Changes

[%header,cols=4]
|===
| Version
| Date
| Change
| Author

| 1.1
| 2022-09-16 
| Added analysis of current ODS format.
| Falko

|===


== Online Platform for with Basic Functionality for Dictionary Editing

This document describes the steps necessary for switching to an online
editing for the group of dictionary editors working on the DPD and
related dictionaries. The idea is to cover the minimal requirements
necessary to enable an online editing of the data base in a manner that
allows for a synchronized access by multiple editors to the same data,
without introducing any disadvantages for the editors. An outline of its
features is listed in the subsequent section.

=== Outline of the Features

* Multiple editors can access the dictionary data concurrently.
* Each dictionary entry in the data base reflects the superset of the
DPD and DPS ODT columns, so that both existing sets of data can merged
and imported into the application.
* Multiple target languages are supported.
* Editors can assume two different roles:
** Dictionary Editor: Full access to all entries
** Language Editor: Access only to a subset of the target languages that
are modelled in the respective dictionary
* The dictionary generation remains as it is currently: a local process
invoked by the editor with the already existing tools. The only
difference is that the input data now is exported from the web
application’s central DB.

=== Current Local Workflow

The following diagram shows the current purely local workflow for
editing and dictionary generation.

[.thumb]
[plantuml, uml_figures/current_workflow]
----
@startuml
skinparam maxMessageSize 150
skinparam wrapWidth 150
skinparam dpi 300

box Local entities
actor "Editor" as editor
database "ODT Database" as odt
collections "CSV Export" as csv
control "Dictionary\nGenerator" as dict_gen
collections "Generated\nDictionary" as gen_dict
end box

group dictionary editing
editor -> odt: edits the dictionary entries
end group

group dictionary generation
odt -> csv: export as CSV
group Existing Dictionary Generation Process
editor -> dict_gen: invoke
csv <- dict_gen: import and process the CSV to generate the inflections, etc.
dict_gen -> gen_dict: produce the dictionary
end


end group

@enduml
----

=== Online Editing Workflow

The following diagrams show the workflows for the initial one-time data
migration, online editing, CSV export from the web-application and local
dictionary generation:

[.thumb]
[plantuml, uml_figures/migration]
....
@startuml
skinparam maxMessageSize 150
skinparam wrapWidth 150
skinparam dpi 300

box Local entities
actor "Editor" as editor
collections "CSV Export" as csv
control "Merge-Tool" as merge_tool
end box

group one-time data migration
editor -> merge_tool: invoke
csv -> merge_tool: input DPD and DPS CSVs
merge_tool -> csv: output merged CSV data together with report about entries where manual merge is necessary
end 
@enduml
....

[.thumb]
[plantuml, uml_figures/dict_edit]
....
@startuml
skinparam maxMessageSize 150
skinparam wrapWidth 150
skinparam dpi 300

box Local entities
actor "Editor" as editor
collections "CSV Export" as csv
control "Dictionary\nGenerator" as dict_gen
collections "Generated\nDictionary" as gen_dict
end box
box Cloud instance #SkyBlue
control "Web\nApplication" as webapp
database "Database" as web_db 
end box


group dictionary editing
editor -> webapp: edits the dictionary entries
webapp -> web_db: update the database
end group

group dictionary generation
editor -> webapp: choose subset of target languages for export
webapp <- web_db: extract data
webapp -> editor: download CSV file
group Existing Dictionary Generation Process
editor -> dict_gen: invoke
csv <- dict_gen: import and process the CSV to generate the inflections, etc.
dict_gen -> gen_dict: produce the dictionary
end


end group

@enduml
....

==== Further Features of the Online Editing Workflow

* Access control: The following user rights and roles are supported:
** Dictionary Owner:
*** full access to all fields of the dictionary entries
*** invite other users to dictionary and assign right and role
** Dictionary Editor: full
*** full access to all fields of the dictionary entries
** Language Editor:
*** Online write access to meaning translations of a defined subset of
target languages
* Prevention of concurrent access:
** If two users modify the same entry concurrently, a corresponding
message is shown to the second user attempting to submit his updates,
allowing him to save his changes elsewhere manually and update the entry
again. (other more sophisticated locking mechanisms are also conceivable
for the future should that become necessary, e.g. timed locks in the
database which would prevent this situation beforehand)
* Search form for dictionary entries
** As a help for the translators, it is also possible to search for
words where a meaning given in primary target language has been more
recently modified than one of its translations (indicating it might need
an update).

=== Comparison of the Current Workflow and the Described Workflow with Online Editing

==== Advantages of the Online Workflow

* Online collaboration:
** After the one-time merge procedure, the editors work on shared data
which is always synchronized.
** It is easy to invite further collaborators for other target
languages.
** Correctness of the web applications import and export features is
easily verifiable: import and export of CSV must yield the same CSV
again.
* Support for multiple meanings for any headword.
** This reflects the common approach of dictionaries. This is hard to
achieve with a spreadsheet database as for each meaning one column has
to be reserved.

==== Disadvantages of the Online Workflow

* Offline editing is no longer possible. The impact of this should be
considered thoroughly, as some editors may reside in southeast-Asian
countries, where power cut-offs and blackouts happen on a regular
basis.footnote:[In principle, it would also be possible to support
offline editing. But the implementation of that would most likely
require a multiple of the effort that is needed for the basic online
editing functionality that is described in this document. This would be
a fragile process needing a lot of attendance; for instance the case
where the cloud instance has already been updated and the user tries to
import data in an old format.]

=== ODS Data model

Table <<#tab_ods_model>> shows the current ODS model of DPD and DPS.


[#tab_ods_model]
.Mapping of ODS models to the data base model 
[%header,cols="3,3,3,2,3,3"]
|===
| Col. DPD
| Col. DPS
| Source format
| Necessary transformation 
| Database field type and format
| Work items / Open Questions

| "POS" – grammatical word type
| "POS"
| <word-type>
| simple mapping which also handles the sub-types of noun-likes
| choice for word type: {verb, noun-like, indeclinable}, type "noun-like" footnote:[In the database model, each words can be assigned a word-type. Noun-like words, i.e. all words that are declined, are captured by the same word-type and can
be assigned one or sub-types for noun-like words out of the list.] has choice for sub-type: {male, neuter,
feminine, adjective, past participle, present participle, gerundivum (to be extended as necessary)}
a| 

* Missing word types need to be added to the data base model. 
* New fields need to be editable via forms. 
* Simple mapping needs to be implemented for import.
#What does "ptp" stand for?#

| "Grammar" – Word type with additional information
| –
| <word-type> [,<word-type>]* [of (<ref. headword as text>\|<ref. headword construction>)] 
|
| plain text field. footnote:[Each dictionary entry will have a text field for the "Grammar" information. As this field from the DPD ODS model often includes a reference to another headword, it is possible to later replace the textual
information with the appropriate link – automatically when there is no ambiguity and through manual interaction elsewhere.]
| Simple mapping needs to be implemented.

| "Derived from" – word which builds the basis for a derivation of an entry.
| –
| partly words, partly constructions:
 ""\|(<headword>)\|(<prefix><root>)
| simple mapping to text field
| text field
| 

| Neg – indicates whether the word carries a negating prefix 
| – 
| ""\|"neg"
| simple mapping  
| boolean field
a| 

* add new data base field
* implement mapping


| "Verb" – derived verb type: whether caus or pass
| –
| "caus"\|"pass"
|
| choice: {caus, pass}
|

| "Trans" – whether verb is transitive
| –
| ""\|"trans"\|"intrans"
|
| choice: {unknown, true, false}
|

| "Case" – case of object when transitive
| –
| ""\|("+acc"\|"+loc"\|"+instr"\|"+dat"\|"+abl"[ & +...]
|
|
|

| "Meaning IN CONTEXT"
| –
| <meaning>[; meaning2 [; ...]]
|
|
| #What does "in context" mean here? Is this the colloquial meaning?#

| "Non IA"
|
|
|
|
| #What does "Non IA" stand for? What are possible values?#

| "Sanskrit"
| –
| word or construction: ""\|(<word(part)>[ + <word-part>])
|
|
|

| "Sk Root"
| –
| ""\|"√ <root>" 
a| 

* build list of all roots from source information
* populate roots table in database
* link word to root in root table
| see section on root table below
|


| "SK" – meaning of the root in Sanskrit
| –
| text
| simple mapping
| text
|

| "Cl" – class of the Sanskrit root (?)
|
|
|
|
| #What is the reference to the set of classes here?#

| "Pāḷi Root"
| –
| ""\|"√ <root>"
| (root table generation), link headword to root
|
|

| "Root In" – internal form of the root
| –
| "0"\|<root with doubled leading consonant>
|
|
|

| "j" 
| –
| "̣
|
|
| #What is "j"?#

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|

|
|
|
|
|
|


|===

=== Database Data Model

==== Roots

Roots are modelled as shown in the following diagram

.Data model for roots
[.thumb]
[plantuml,uml_figures/model_roots]
....
@startuml
skinparam wrapWidth 250
skinparam dpi 200

hide circle 

entity "Root" as root {
<<col>> *id
<<col>> pali_root: Text [e.g. "bhidh"]
<<col>> variant: Integer [e.g. "1"]
--
<<col> in_comps: Text
<<col>> group: Integer
<<col>> sign: Text
<<col>> meaning: Text
<<col>> sk_root: Text
<<col>> sk_root_mn: Text
<<col>> example: Text
<<col>> what: Text
<<col>> same_diff: Bool
<<col>> matrix: Bool
'<<col>> dhatupatha: Integer
'<<col>> dp_root_text: Text
'<<col>> dp_root_variant: Integer
'<<col>> dp_pali: Text 
'<<col>> dp_english: Text
'<<col>> kaccayana_dhatu_manjusa: Integer
'<<col>> dm_root: Text 
'<<col>> dm_pali: Text 
'<<col>> dm_english: Text
'<<col>> saddanitippakaranam_dhatumala
'<<col>> SnPāli
'<<col>> 
...
}
note right of root: Questions: what does bold text in the columns DpPāli and DpEnglish indicate? Doese this need to be preserved? What is the meaning of the column "What?" and is it necessary? What does "matrix" indicate?

note top of root: pali_root together with variant is unique. same_diff indicates whether in_comps is non-empty and differs from pali_root. It must updated on each update of an object.


entity "base" as base {
<<col>> *id
--
<<col>> str_value: Text
<<col>> derivation: Choice {"none", "caus", "pass"} 

}

entity "class" as class {
<<col>> *class: Integer
--
}

entity "root dictionary" as root_dict {
<<col>> *id
<<col>> name: Text (unique) (e.g. "Pāṇinīya Dhātupāṭha")
--
<<col>> source_language: Choice {"pali", "sanskrit"}
<<col>> variant: Integer
<<col>> target_language: Choice {"english"}

}


entity "root dictionary entry" as root_dict_entry {
<<col>> *id
--
<<col>> number: Integer
<<col>> root_dict: Ref. to "root dictionary"
<<col>> root: Text (i.e. in source language)
<<col>> translation: Text (i.e. in target language)
}

note left of root_dict_entry: "number" receives the first column given for example for Dhātupātha and Kaccāyana Dhātu Mañjūsā. "variant" seems to be needed only for Dhātupātha.

note top of root_dict: this object models the historical root dictionaries, e.g. DpPāli, etc.

note bottom of root_dict_entry: this object is one entry in one of the root dictionaries for a given Pāḷi root

root ||..o{ base
root }o..o{ class 
root_dict ||..o{ root_dict_entry
root ||..o{ root_dict_entry

@enduml
....

==== Dictionary Entries

The following diagram shows the data base model for the dictionary data:

* Each dictionary has a number of entries (headwords)
* Each headword object features the superset of all the columns
currently used in DPD and DPS
* Each headword can have any number of meanings in the dictionary’s
primary target language (i.e. here English)
* Each meaning can have translations in any secondary target language
defined for this dictionary

[.thumb]
[plantuml,uml_figures/model_dict_entry]
....
@startuml
skinparam wrapWidth 650
skinparam dpi 300

hide circle 
entity "Dictionary" as dict {
<<col>> *dictionary_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> Dictionary name 
}

entity "Dictionary Entry (Headword)" as entry {
<<col>> *entry_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> <superset of all columns of DPD and DPS except for meanings>
<<col>> variant: Integer 

}
note right of entry: "variant" differentiates between various etymologically\ndifferent homonyms as e.g. PED does with superscript\nnumbers ("dhamma¹" etc). "variant" is automatically assigned\nby the application.

entity "Meaning" as meaning {
<<col>> *meaning_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> meaning_text: Text
}
note right of meaning: meaning is given in the primary target language\nof the dictionary


entity "Meaning_Translation" as meaning_translation {
<<col>> *meaning_id (primary key)
--
<<col>> meaning_text: Text
<<col>> target_language: Integer 
}
note right of meaning_translation: application logic ensures that only one meaning\ntranslation per target_language is possible

 dict ||..o{ entry
 entry ||..o{ meaning
 meaning ||..o{ meaning_translation 
@enduml
....
